Now that we've looked at R and RStudio and have a basic understanding of how they work together, we can get at one thing that makes R so special: packages. 

So far, anything we've played around with in R uses the "base" R system. Base R, or everything included in R when you download it, has rather basic functionality for statistics and plotting but it can sometimes be limiting. To expand upon R's basic functionality, people have developed packages. A package is a collection of functions, data, and code conveniently provided in a nice, complete format for you. At the time of writing, there are just over 14,300 packages available to download - each with their own specialized functions and code, all for some different purpose. A package is not to be confused with a library (these two terms are often conflated in colloquial speech about R). A library is the place where the package is located on your computer. To think of an analogy, a library is, well, a library... and a package is a book within the library. The library is where the books/packages are located. 

Packages are what make R so unique. Not only does base R have some great functionality but these packages greatly expand its functionality. And perhaps most special of all, each package is developed and published by the R community at large and deposited in repositories. You may remember the word "repository" from an earlier lesson on GitHub. Like in GitHub, where a repository was where all the code for each data science project is stored, the repositories for R packages are also places where information and code are stored. For R packages, a repository is central location where many developed packages are located and available for download. There are three big repositories, they are the Comprehensive R Archive Network (or CRAN), which is R's main repository with over 12,100 packages available! There is also the Bio Conductor repository, which is mainly for bioinformatic-focused packages. And finally there is Git Hub, a very popular, open source repository that is not R specific.

So you know where to find packages... but there are so many of them, how can you find a package that will do what you are trying to do in R? There are a few different avenues for exploring packages. First, CRAN groups all of its packages by their functionality or topic into 35 "themes." It calls this its "Task view." This at least allows you to narrow the packages you can look through to a topic relevant to your interests. 

Second, there is a great website, R Documentation which is a search engine for packages and functions from CRAN, BioConductor, and GitHub (ie: the big three repositories). If you have a task in mind, this is a great way to search for specific packages to help you accomplish that task! It also has a task view like CRAN, that allows you to browse themes. More often, if you have a specific task in mind, Googling that task followed by "R package" is a great place to start! From there, looking at tutorials, vignettes, and forums for people already doing what you want to do is a great way to find relevant packages. 

Great! You've found a package you want... How do you install it? If you are installing from the CRAN repository, use the install packages function, with the name of the package you want to install in quotes between the parentheses (note: you can use either single or double quotes). For example, if you want to install the package g g plot 2, you would use: install dot packages, with g g plot 2 in quotes between parentheses. Try doing so in your R console! This command downloads the g g plot 2 package from CRAN and installs it onto your computer. If you want to install multiple packages at once, you can do so by using a character vector, where instead of g g plot 2 alone, you would type a C followed by a list of the packages you want to install, in quotes, separated by commas. For example, you would type C, open parenthesis, g g plot 2, comma, dev tools, comma, l m e 4, closed parenthesis, with all of the packages in quotes. If you want to use RStudio's graphical interface to install packages, go to the Tools menu, and the first option should be "Install packages..." 

If installing from CRAN, select it as the repository and type the desired packages in the appropriate box. 

The Bio Conductor repository uses their own method to install packages. First, to get the basic functions required to install through Bio Conductor, use: source, open parenthesis, quote, h t t p s, colon, two forward slashes, bio conductor dot org, forward slash, bio c Lite dot R, quote, closed parenthesis. This makes the main install function of Bio Conductor, bio c Lite, available to you. Following this, you call the package you want to install in quotes, between the parentheses of the bio c  Lite command, for example, Genomic Features in quotes, between the parentheses of the Bio c Lite function. 

Installing from Git Hub is a more specific case that you probably won't run into too often. As packages are developed, the code is frequently put into a Git Hub repository. At this point, as long as the repository is public, anyone can install the package in R Studio. However, most developers, once a package is complete, will submit it to CRAN, making it stably available to all R users. Thus, most of the packages discussed throughout these courses will be available from CRAN. However, newer packages that are still under active development will likely have to be installed directly from GitHub. In the event you want to do this, you first must find the package you want on GitHub and take note of both the package name and the author of the package. The general workflow is installing the dev tools package, only if you don't already have dev tools installed. If you've been following along with this lesson, you may have installed it when we were practicing installations using the R console. Then you load the dev tools package, using library, open parenthesis, dev tools, closed parenthesis. More on what this command is doing in a few seconds. And finally, using the command install, underscore, github, open parenthesis, quote, author, slash, package, quote, closed parenthesis, replacing "author" and "package" with their Git Hub username and the name of the package. 

Installing a package does not make its functions immediately available to you. First you must load the package into R; to do so, use the library function. Think of this like any other software you install on your computer. Just because you've installed a program, doesn't mean it's automatically running - you have to open the program. Same with R. You've installed it, but now you have to "open" it. For example, to "open" the g g plot 2 package, you would run: library, parenthesis, g g plot 2, parenthesis. Note: Do not put the package name in quotes! Unlike when you are installing the packages, the library command does not accept package names in quotes! There is an order to loading packages - some packages require other packages to be loaded first. These other packages are known as dependencies. When you install a new package, that new package's manual or help pages will automatically determine what packages this new package is dependent upon and will install those packages as well. 

If you want to load a package using the R Studio interface, in the lower right quadrant there is a tab called "Packages" that lists out all of the packages and a brief description, as well as the version number, of all of the packages you have installed. To load a package just click on the checkbox beside the package name.

Once you've got a package, there are a few things you might need to know how to do. If you aren't sure if you've already installed a package, or want to check what packages are installed, you can use either of the installed packages or library commands with nothing between the parentheses to check! In R Studio, that package tab introduced earlier is another way to look at all of the packages you have installed. You can check what packages need an update with a call to the function old packages. This will identify all packages that have been updated since you installed them or last updated them. To update all packages, use update packages. If you only want to update a specific package, just use once again install packages.

Within the R Studio interface, still in that Packages tab, you can click "Update," which will list all of the packages that are not up to date. It gives you the option to update all of your packages, or allows you to select specific packages. You will want to periodically check in on your packages and check if you've fallen out of date - be careful though! Sometimes an update can change the functionality of certain functions, so if you re-run some old code, the command may be changed or perhaps even outright gone and you will need to update your code too! 

Sometimes you want to unload a package in the middle of a script - the package you have loaded may not play nicely with another package you want to use. To unload a given package you can use the detach function. For example, you would type detach, followed by parentheses, and within quotes, package, colon, g g plot 2, end quotes, followed by a comma, then unload equals true. This would unload the g g plot 2 package (that we loaded earlier). Within the R Studio interface, in the Packages tab, you can simply unload a package by unchecking the box beside the package name.

If you no longer want to have a package installed, you can simply uninstall it using the function remove dot packages. For example, remove packages followed by g g plot 2 in quotes between parentheses would uninstall the g g plot 2 package. (Try that, but then actually re-install the g g plot 2 package - it's a super useful plotting package!). Within R Studio, in the Packages tab, clicking on the "X" at the end of a package's row will uninstall that package. 

Sometimes, when you are looking at a package that you might want to install, you will see that it requires a certain version of R to run. To know if you can use that package, you need to know what version of R you are running! One way to know your R version is to check when you first open R or R Studio - the first thing it outputs in the console tells you what version of R is currently running. If you didn't pay attention at the beginning, you can type version into the console and it will output information on the R version you are running. Another helpful command is session Info - it will tell you what version of R you are running along with a listing of all of the packages you have loaded. The output of this command is a great detail to include when posting a question to forums - it tells potential helpers a lot of information about your OS, R, and the packages (plus their version numbers!) that you are using.

In the output from session Info, you'll note that the end of each package's name has an underscore followed by a series of numbers. Those numbers indicate the packages version. For example, the version of g g plot 2 installed in this session is version version two point two point 1. This number will change and will increase every time developers make changes to this package.

In all of this information about packages, we haven't actually discussed how to use a package's functions! While functions are discussed in greater detail in a later lesson in this course, for now, know that to use the contents of a package, you'll use functions. First, you need to know what functions are included within a package. To do this, you can look at the man or help pages included in all (well-made) packages. In the console, you can use the help function to access a package's help files. Try help followed by package equals quote g g plot end quote all in parentheses and you will see all of the many functions that g g plot 2 provides. Within the R Studio interface, you can access the help files through the Packages tab (again) - clicking on any package name should open up the associated help files in the "Help" tab, found in that same quadrant, beside the Packages tab. Clicking on any one of these help pages will take you to that functions help page, that tells you what that function is for and how to use it. Once you know what function within a package you want to use, you simply call it in the console like any other function we've been using throughout this lesson. Once a package has been loaded, it is as if it were a part of the base R functionality. 

If you still have questions about what functions within a package are right for you or how to use them, many packages include vignettes. These are extended help files, that include an overview of the package and its functions, but often they go the extra mile and include detailed examples of how to use the functions in plain words that you can follow along with to see how to use the package. To see the vignettes included in a package, you can use the browse Vignettes function. For example, let's look at the vignettes included in g g plot 2 using browse Vignettes followed by g g plot 2 in quotes between parentheses. You should see that there are two included vignettes: "Extending g g plot 2" and "Aesthetic specifications." Exploring the Aesthetic specifications vignette is a great example of how vignettes can be helpful, clear instructions on how to use the included functions. 

In this lesson, we've explored R packages in depth. We examined what a packages is (and how it differs from a library), what repositories are, and how to find a package relevant to your interests. We investigated all aspects of how packages work: how to install them (from the various repositories), how to load them, how to check which packages are installed, and how to update, uninstall, and unload packages. We took a small detour and looked at how to check what version of R you have, which is often an important detail to know when installing packages. And finally, we spent some time learning how to explore help files and vignettes, which often give you a good idea of how to use a package and all of its functions. 