Now that we've gone over what exactly R is and outlined the package functionality that makes it useful for working with data, we are going to cover information needed to actually start working in R. To work with data in R, you'll need an understanding of objects.

Simply put, an object in R is something that contains information. In R there are a number of basic classes of objects. Five classes that you'll be working with commonly are character, integer, numeric which are for real numbers, logical which are for true and false values, and factor which are for categorical information. These classes are the building blocks for creating all sorts of objects in R. The simplest type of object in R is called a vector, which is an object that can contain multiple items. Generally, vectors can only contain objects of the same class, but a certain type of vector, called a list, can contain objects of different classes. You will learn about lists in a later lesson. We'll begin this lesson by looking at how to create objects in each of these five basic classes in R.

In R, as with all programming languages, it is important to be able to store objects that we create so that we can use them in later code. The process of storing an object is called assignment, and it entails giving an object a name. For example, the following code creates an object called min underscore age and stores inside it the value 21. The left pointing arrow operator is called the assignment operator. The equals sign operator can also be used for assignment. Having this minimum age variable stored in an object can be useful later if we have data where we only want to keep individuals who exceed this minimum age.

Character objects in R can be created by surrounding a string in either double quotes or single quotes. The second example shows how to store a sentence character object in an object named my underscore car. My car is a character vector of length 1. We can create a character vector named my car vec with multiple character objects using the concatenate function, c. We'll discuss functions more in later lessons.

Integer objects in R can be created by specifying an integer number followed by the letter L. The following creates an integer object called num and stores the value 1. Without the letter L, the number will be recognized as a more generic, numeric object. We can create an integer vector with multiple items using the c function. The last example creates an integer vector of length 3 with the numbers 1, 10, and 3.

Numeric objects in R represent real numbers and are created by simply entering a number. We can create a numeric vector with multiple items using the c function.

Logical objects in R represent true or false conditions and can be created by typing true or false in all capital letters. We can create a logical vector with multiple items using the c function.

Factor objects contain information for categorical variables. They have similarities to character objects and integer objects. The colors object is a character vector containing five pieces of color information. There are only two unique colors present: red and blue. These unique colors are called the levels of a factor. To create a factor object out of this character vector we can use the factor function or the as dot factor function. Let's try both and look at the objects created. When we use the factor function we also specify the levels to be red and blue. The order of the levels we specified is important: first red, then blue. We can see that when we print this object the levels are listed in the order we specified. A quick way to create a factor object is with the coercion function as dot factor. When we print this object, the levels are opposite to what we specified when we use the factor function because by default, the levels are specified in alphabetical order. Here the first level is blue and the second is red. The ordering of levels will be important in future courses when we cover data tidying, plotting, and statistical modeling.

One last topic to cover with factors is labeling. We can control the displayed labels of a factor with another option with the factor function. This need often arises if we want to create a factor object from an integer object or from a character object with labels that we don't like. In the example here, we see that we originally had ozone information encoded with integers. When we use the factor function to make a corresponding factor object, we specify both the unique levels present in the integer object and the desired labels with a character vector. The order of the specified levels shold correspond to the order of the specified labels. The two examples, ozone underscore factor and ozone underscore factor two, create the same labeling of the original integer vector, but the order of the levels is different between the two approaches. In the first approach, the first level is low, the second is medium, and the third is high, which is the most natural ordering. In the second approach, the first level is medium, the second is low, and the third is high.

Now that we've covered common basic data classes, we will now discuss data frames. Data frames are a more complex data type than the simple vectors than we've seen so far. Data frames organize data into a rectangular format where each column corresponds to a single variable and each row corresponds to an observation. So a row of a data frame contains an observation's values for all variables. An example of a data frame is shown here. Along the columns there are different variables related to car properties, and each row gives information on those properties for a particular car model. Every column in a data frame is a simple vector of values all from the same class. Most often, the data that we work with can be represented with data frames. You will learn more about working with data frames in subsequent lessons in this course and also in later courses.

The last topic that we should discuss in our introduction to R objects is missing values. During nearly any type of data collection, there is information missing for one or more variables. Thus, it is important to understand how R handles missing values. Most missing values that you will deal with are encoded with N A in R. Here are some examples of creating objects of the various basic types we discussed above that contain missing values. Another missing value that can arise in R is NaN which stands for "not a number." This can arise in mathematical calculations, such as 0 divided by 0.
